# C/C++ Rules

There are 3 phrases in the C/C++ building: preprocessing, compiling, linking. with different flags.

The common CC attributes are：

- `warning`: str = ['yes', 'no'], Whether suppress all warnings

  Example: `warning='no'`. The default values is 'yes', so can be omitted.

- `defs`:str = [], User define macros

  Example: `defs=['_MT']`, can also has value, eg. `'A=1'`.

- `incs`: list(str) = [] header search paths

  Example: `incs=['poppy/myinc']`.

  Usually used for thirdparty library, use full include path in our code is more recommended.

- `optimize` optimize flags

  Example: `optimize=['-O3']`

  There is a separated `optimize` attribute from the `extra_cppflags`, because it should be ignored
  in the debug mode, otherwise it will hinder debugging. but for some kind of libraries, which are
  mature enough and performance related, we rarely debug trace into them, such as hash, compress,
  crypto, you can specify `always_optimize = True`.

- `extra_cppflags`:list(str) = [], Extra C/C++ compile flags.

  Example: `extra_cppflags = ['-Wno-format-literal']`. many useful flags, such as `-g`，`-fPIC` are builtin. so it should be rarely used.

- `extra_linkflags`:list(str) = [], Extra link flags

  Example: `extra_linkflags = ['-fopenmp']`. many useful flags such `-g` are already built in, so it should be rarely used.

- `linkflags`: list = None, Overrides the global [linkflags](../config.md#cc_config) in the configuration.

  For example: `linkflags = ['-fopenmp']`.

  Commonly used flags such as `-g` are already built-in, and generally do not need to be specified.
  Because global options will be overridden, unless you really understand the link related options of `gcc` and `ld`,
  do not use this parameter lightly.

## cc_library

Build a C/C++ library

`cc_library` can be used to build static and dynamic library. But only the static library will built default, unless it is depended by a
dynamic_linked cc_binary, or run blade build with `--generate-dynamic`.

Example:

```python
cc_library(
    name='lowercase',
    srcs=['lower/plowercase.cpp'],
    hdrs=['lower/plowercase.h'],
    deps=['#pthread'],
    link_all_symbols=False
)
```

Attributes:

- `hdrs`: list

  Declares the public interface header files of the library.

  For normal CC libraries, `hdrs` should exist, otherwise the library may not be used. Therefore, this attribute is required,
  otherwise a diagnostic problem will be reported. If it surely does not exist, you should set it to empty([]) explicitly.

  The severity of the problem can be controlled by [`cc_library_config.hdrs_missing_severity`](../config.md#cc_library_config).
  For problems that existed before hdrs support, you can use [`cc_library_config.hdrs_missing_suppress`](../config.md#cc_library_config) to suppress
  them.

  Rules for generating header files during construction, such as `pb.h` generated by `proto_library` or `outs` of the `gen_rule` target,
  if these header files are included, these header files will also be automatically included.
  Including the header file in the dependency management can avoid compilation or linking problems caused by the library that includes
  the header file but does not add the dependency, especially for dynamically generated header files.

  A header file can belong to multiple `cc_library`. `cc_library` will not automatically export `hdrs` of other `cc_library` that it depends on in
  `deps`.
  Only public header files should be declared in `hdrs`. For private header files, even if they are included in public header files,
  they do not need to be included. Private header files should be declared in its `srcs`.

  All CC libraries should be described by `cc_library`, especially for headers-only libraries.
  Because most library inevitably depends on other libraries, if dependency of the ordinary library is shortage,
  the "symbol not found" error will be reported during linking, it is easier to add missing dependencies based on error information,
  but for headers-only libraries, even indirect dependencies, errors are reported at the linking time of the final user,
  making it difficult to locate and fix the problem.

  Therefore, for header-only libraries, they also needs to be described with `cc_library`, its public header files need to be
  declared in its `hdrs`, and its direct dependencies need to be listed in its `deps`.

  If the granularity of the library is too large, some unnecessary dependencies will be included due to the enforcement
  of the `hdrs` checking. You should proper splitting the library to reduce unnecessary coupling.

  For example, [gtest_prod.h](https://github.com/google/googletest/blob/master/googletest/include/gtest/gtest_prod.h) of
  gtest is often used to declare testing support in product code, but it only contains some declarations and does not
  depend on the implementation part of the gtest library. It is suitable to declare it in a separate `gtest_prod`
  library instead of putting it into `gtest` library, Otherwise, the gtest library may be linked into the product code.

- `link_all_symbols`: bool = False

  If you depends on the global initialization to register something, but didn't access these
  global object directly. it works for code in `srcs` of executable. but if the global is in a library, it will be
  discarded at the link time because linker find it is unsed.

  This attribute tells the linker don't discard any unused symbols in this library even if it seems
  to be unused.

  You'd better put these self-registering code into a separated small library. otherwise, the whole
  library will be linked into the executable unconditionally, increase the size of the executable.

  Youi also need to know, the `link_all_symbols` is the attribute of the library, not the user of it.
  Click [here](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/805555/ld-linker-question-the-whole-archive-option) to learn more details if you have interesting.

- `binary_link_only`: bool = False

  This library can only be a depenedency of the executable targets (Such as `cc_binary` or `cc_test`), but not normal `cc_library`s. This attribute is
  useful for some exclusive libraries such as malloc library.

  For example, `tcmalloc` and `jemalloc` are both malloc library which contains same symbols (such as `malloc`, `free`), if a `cc_library` depends on
  `tcmalloc`, the dependent `cc_binary` may not depends on `jemalloc` any more, otherwise linker will report multiple `malloc` definition. This
  problem can be solved by setting this attribute on both 'tcmalloc' and 'jemalloc'.

  A 'binary_link_only' library can depends on other 'binary_link_only' libraries.

  ```python
  cc_library(
      name = 'tcmaloc',
      binary_link_only = True,
      ...
  )

  cc_library(
      name = 'jemaloc',
      binary_link_only = True,
      ...
  )
  ```

- `always_optimize`: bool = False

  True: Always optimize.
  False: Don't optimize in debug mode。
  The default value is False。It only apply to cc_library.

- `prebuilt`: bool = False

  Use prebuilt in cc_library is deprecated. you should use `prebuilt_cc_library`.

- `export_incs`: list = []

  Similar to `incs`, but it is transitive for all targets depends on it, even if indirect depends on it.

  NOTE:

  There is no dependency code in the generated cc_library, both static and dynamic. But for the
  dynamic library, it contains the paths of dependencies.

  These libraries can just be used locally (such as run tests)，not fit for the production environment.
  If you want to build a shared library can be use in the environment, you should use `cc_plugin`,
  which will include the code from it dependencies.

### Fix missing dependencies errors caused by `hdrs`

In large-scale C++ projects, dependency management is very important, and header files have not been included in it for a long time.
Starting with Blade 2.0, header files have also been included in dependency management.
When a cc target includes a header file, it also needs to put the `cc_library` it belongs to in its own `deps`, otherwise Blade will check and report
the problem.

The lack of a declaration on the library to which the header files belong will cause the following problems:

- The dependencies between libraries cannot be transferred correctly. If the library to which an undeclared header file belongs adds new dependencies
  in the future, it may cause link errors.
- For the header files generated during the build, the lack of a dependency declaration for the library to which they belong will cause these header
  files to have not yet been generated at compile time, resulting in compilation errors.
- To make matters worse, if these header files already exist but have not been updated, outdated header files may be used during compilation, which
  will cause runtime errors that are more difficult to troubleshoot.

The severity of the problem can be controlled by the [`cc_config.hdr_dep_missing_severity`](../config.md#cc_config) configuration item.
For problems that existed before hdrs were supported, It can be suppressed by [`cc_config.hdr_dep_missing_suppress`](../config.md#cc_config).

Blade can detect two kind of missing dependencies:

- `Missing dependenvy`

  The header files are included in `srcs` or `hdrs` through the `#include` directive, but the library
  to which they belong is not declared in `deps`, or these header files are not declared in any `hdrs`
  of `cc_library` at all. Problems and solution:

  - The library to which the header file belongs is not declared in the `deps` of this target, just follow the instruction to fix it
  - The header file is a private header file of the library to which it belongs, and direct use is prohibited
  - The header file should be the public header file of this target, it should be declared in its `hdr`
  - The header file should be the target's private header file, it should be declared in its `src`
  - The header file should be a public header file of other libraries, but there is no declaration, just declare it in the corresponding library `hdr`

- `Missing indirect dependency`

  One of the indirect included header file(included in the header file) does not appear in the `deps` of this target and its transitive dependencies.

  We only do this check for the header files generated during compilation.
  Because for the rules for generating header files (such as `proto_library` or possibly `gen_rule`), if the dependencies are missing,
  it may cause these header files to be ungenerated or outdated when compiling the current target, resulting in compilation errors.
  Fixing this error is a little more troublesome. You need to analyze the include stack reported by the error message, starting from the source file,
  and searching upwards in the library to which each header file belongs, whether it depends on the library to which the included header file belongs.

  At this time, you may encounter a situation, that is, some libraries with pure header files have no implementation files, so there is no orresponding
  `cc_library` to describe it. To fix this issue, you need to write a new `cc_library` for it, add header files in the `hdrs`, add the implementation
  dependencies in its `deps`, and add it to the `deps` of which library depends on it.

  This can solve the root cause, but it does require some effort. The simple and rude solution is to add the reported missing library to the current
  target `deps`, which is equivalent to relying on the implementation details of some libraries, which is not recommended.

Since Blade fully managed the dependency of header files, for any header files that are not declared in the `hdrs` or `src` of any library,
an error will be reported after the build. If these header files should belong to the current target,
According to whether it is public or private, add it to `hdrs` or `srcs` respectively.
If it belongs to other libraries, it should be added to `hdrs` of other libraries, and you cannot include undeclared or private header files of other libraries.

For undeclared header files that already existed in the code base before the upgrade, you can use the
[cc_config.allowed_undeclared_hdrs](../config.md#cc_config) configuration item to mask the check.

## prebuilt_cc_library

For libraries without source code, library should be put under the lib{32,64} sub dir accordingly.
The attributes `deps`, `export_incs`, `link_all_symbols` is still avialiable, but other attributes,
include compile and link related options, are not not present in prebuilt_cc_library.

Attributes:

- `libpath_pattern`: str, The subdirectory which contains the library files. It default to `cc_library_config.prebuilt_libpath_pattern` config.
  See [cc_library_config.prebuilt_libpath_pattern](../config.md#cc_library_config) for more details.

Example:

```python
prebuilt_cc_library(
    name = 'mysql',
    deps = [':mystring', '#pthread']
)
```

## foreign_cc_library

NOTE: This feature is still experimental.

There are already a large number of existing libraries in the world. They are built with different build systems.
If you want to add Blade build support to them, you need to invest a lot of time cost and maintenance.
foreign_cc_library is used to describe C/C++ libraries not built directly by Blade but generated by other build systems, such as make or cmake.
The main difference between foreign_cc_library and prebuilt_cc_library is that the library it describes is dynamically generated by Blade during the
build by calling other build systems,
The library described by prebuilt_cc_library is placed in the source tree before the build. So generally foreign_cc_library always needs to be used
with gen_rule.

Considering that a large number of C/C++ libraries are built with [GNU Autotools](http://autotoolset.sourceforge.net/tutorial.html),
the default parameters of foreign_cc_library are adapted to the
[autotools installation directory layout](https://www.gnu.org/software/automake/manual/html_node/Standard-Directory-Variables.html).
In order to find the library and header files correctly, foreign_cc_library assumes that the package will be installed in a certain directory
after the build (that is, the path specified by the `--prefix` parameter of `configure`), and the header file is in the `include` subdirectory,
The library file is installed in the `lib` subdirectory.

Attributes:

- `name`: str, The name of the library
- `install_dir`: str, The installation directory after the package is built
- `lib_dir`: list, The subdirectory name of the library in the installation directory
- `has_dynamic`: bool = False, Whether this library has a dynamic linked edition.

### Example1, zlib

zlib can be the simplest example of autotools package. Assuming that `zlib-1.2.11.tar.gz` is in the `thirparty/zlib` directory, its BUILD file is
`thirdparty/zlib/BUILD`:

```python
# Assume that after executing this rule, the built package will be installed under `build64_release/thirdparty/openssl`,
# then the header file is under `include/openssl`, and the library file is under `lib`.
# We have developed general build rules for autotools and cmake, but they are still in the experimental state.
# Here we still use `gen_rule` to examplify.
gen_rule(
    name = 'zlib_build',
    srcs = ['zlib-1.2.11.tar.gz'],
    outs = ['lib/libz.a', 'include/zlib.h', 'include/zconf.h'],
    cmd = '...',  # tar xf，configure, make, make install...
)

# Describe the installed library of zlib

foreign_cc_library(
    name = 'z',  # The name of the library is `libz.a`，under the `lib` subdirectory
    install_dir = '', # The installation directory is `build64_release/thirdparty/libz`
    # lib_dir= 'lib', # The dafault os OK and can be omitted.
    deps = [':zlib_build'],
)
```

Use the above library:

```python
cc_binary(
    name = 'use_zlib',
    srcs = ['use_zlib.cc'],
    deps = ['//thirdparty/openssl:ssl'],
)
```

use_openssl.cc:

```cpp
#include "thirdparty/zlib/include/zlib.h"
// or
#include "zlib.h"
// because `thirdparty/zlib/include` has been exported in the `foreign_cc_library` defaultly
```

### 示例 2，openssl

Strictly speaking, openssl is not built with autotools, but it is generally compatible with autotools.
Its autotools-like configure file is `Config`, and the directory layout after installation is compatible.
However, its header file paths have package name prefix, which is not directly under `include` but under the `include/openssl` subdirectory.

Suppose openssl-1.1.0.tar.gz is in the thirparty/openssl directory, and its BUILD file is thirdparty/openssl/BUILD:

```python
# Assuming that after executing this rule, the built package will be installed under `build64_release/thirdparty/openssl`,
# then the header file is under `include/openssl` and the library file is under `lib`.
gen_rule(
    name = 'openssl_build',
    srcs = ['openssl-1.1.0.tar.gz'],
    outs = ['lib/libcrypto.a', 'lib/libss.a'],
    cmd = '...',  # tar xf，Config, make, make install...
    export_incs = 'include', # Let the compiler find the `openssl` subdirectory under `include`
)

# Describe the above 2 libraries

foreign_cc_library(
    name = 'crypto',  # The name of the library is libcrypto.a, under the `lib` subdirectory
    install_dir = '', # The installation directory is `build64_release/thirdparty/openssl`
    deps = [':openssl_build'],
)

foreign_cc_library(
    name = 'ssl',  # The name of the library is libssl.a, under the `lib` subdirectory
    install_dir = '',
    deps  = [':openssl_build', ':crypto'],
)
```

Use the above library:

```python
cc_binary(
    name = 'use_openssl',
    srcs = ['use_openssl.cc'],
    deps = ['//thirdparty/openssl:ssl'],
)
```

use_openssl.cc:

```cpp
#include "openssl/ssl.h"  // Contains package name
```

## cc_binary

Build executable from source.

Example:

```python
cc_binary(
    name='prstr',
    srcs=['./src/mystr_main/mystring.cpp'],
    deps=['#pthread',':lowercase',':uppercase','#dl'],
)
```

- `dynamic_link`:bool = False

  cc_binary is static linked defaultly for easy deploying, include libstdc++.
  For some [technology limitation](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/8140439/why-would-it-be-impossible-to-fully-statically-link-an-application)，
  glibc is not static linked. we can link it statically, but there are still some problems.

  If you want to generate a dynamic linked executable, you can set it to True，all dependency
  libraries will be linked statically, except prebuilt libraries if they has no dynamic version.
  This may reduce disk usage, but program will startup slower. Usually it can be use for local
  testing, but it didn't fit for deploy.

- `export_dynamic`: = True

  Usually, dynamic library will only access symbols from its dependencies. but for some special
  case, shared library need to access symbols defined in the host executable, so come the attribute.

  This attribute tells linker to put all symbols into its dynamic symbol table. make them visible
   for loaded shared libraries. for more details, see `--export-dynamic` in man ld(1).

## cc_test

cc_binary, with gtest gtest_main be linked automatically,

Test will be ran in a test sandbox, it can't access source code directly.
If you want to pass some data files into it, you must need `testdata` attribute.

- `testdata`: list = []

  Copy test data files into the test sandbox, make them visible to the test code.
  This attribute supports the following forms:

  - `'file'`

    Use the original filename in test code.
  - `'//your_proj/path/file'`

    Use "your_proj/path/file" form to access in test code.
  - `('//your_proj/path/file', "new_name")`

    Use the "new_name" in test code.

Example:

```python
cc_test(
    name = 'textfile_test',
    srcs = 'textfile_test.cpp',
    deps = ':io',
    testdata = [
        'test_dos.txt',
        '//your_proj/path/file',
        ('//your_proj/path/file', 'new_name')
    ]
)
```

## cc_plugin

Link all denendencies into the generated `so` file, make it can be easily loaded in other languages.

```python
cc_plugin(
    name='mystring',
    srcs=['./src/mystr/mystring.cpp'],
    deps=['#pthread',':lowercase',':uppercase','#dl'],
    warning='no',
    defs=['_MT'],
    optimize=['O3']
)
```

Attributes:

- `prefix`: str = 'lib', the file name prefix of the generated dynamic library, the default is `lib`
- `suffix`: str = '.so', the file name prefix of the generated dynamic library, the default is `.so`
- `allow_undefined`: bool = False, whether undefined symbols are allowed when linking. Because many plug-in libraries depend on the symbol names provided by the
  host process at runtime, the definition of these symbols does not exist in the link phase.
- `strip`: bool = False, whether to remove the debugging symbol information. If enabled, the size of the generated library can be reduced, but symbolic debugging
  cannot be performed.

`prefix` and `suffix` control the file name of the generated dynamic library, assuming `name='file'`, the default generated library is `libfile.so`,
set `prefix=''`, then it becomes `file. so`.

`cc_plugin` is mainly used to create various extensions, such as JNI, python extension and other dynamic libraries
that are dynamically loaded by calling certain functions during runtime.
It will be ignored when linking even if it appears in the `deps` of other cc targets.

## resource_library

Compile static data file to be resource, which can be accessed in the program directly.

When we deploy a program, it often requires many other files to be deployed together. it's often boring.
Blade support `resource_library`, make it quite easy to put resource files into the executable easily.
For example, put there static pages into a library：

```python
resource_library(
    name = 'static_resource',
    srcs = [
        'static/favicon.ico',
        'static/forms.html',
        'static/forms.js',
        'static/jquery-1.4.2.min.js',
        'static/jquery.json-2.2.min.js',
        'static/methods.html',
        'static/poppy.html'
    ]
)
```

It will generate a library `libstatic_resource.a`，and a header file `static_resource.h`(with full include path)。

When you need tp use it, you need to include `static_resource.h`(with full path from workspace root)
and also "common/base/static_resource.h"，

Use STATIC_RESOURCE macro to simplify access to the data (defined in "common/base/static_resource.h"):

```cpp
StringPiece data = STATIC_RESOURCE(poppy_static_favicon_ico);
```

The argument of STATIC_RESOURCE is the full path of the data file, and replace all of the
non-alphanum and hyphen character to unserscore(`_`):

The data is readonly static storage. can be accessed in any time.

NOTE:
There is a little drawback for static resource, it can;t be updated at the runtime, so consider it before using.
